Add parachain / solochain section to Runtime Upgrades page (#6156)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-runtime-upgrades.md

---

> Runtime upgrades allow {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} to change the

Reviewer: This needs rephrasing. 

_Runtime upgrades allow Polkadot/Kusama to change the logic of a Substrate based chain...._

The runtime upgrades of chains like Polkadot/Kusama built with the Substrate framework of Polkadot SDK can be executed without the need for a hard fork.

Author: Rephrased; let me know if it is sufficient. I also removed the mention of Substrate and just kept it at Polkadot SDK, to keep it consistent.

logic of a Substrate-based chain without the need for a hard fork.

:::info Substrate is part of the Polkadot SDK

> Substrate is one of the core parts of the Polkadot SDK, containing libraries used to build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Substrate is one of the core components of the Polkadot SDK, containing libraries used to build
```

inefficient, and error-prone due to the levels of offline coordination required and, therefore, the
propensity to bundle many upgrades into one large-scale event.

The usage of [WebAssembly](./learn-wasm.md) in the Polkadot SDK (the framework powering Polkadot,
Kusama, and its respective parachains/rollups), gives any relay chains, parachains, and any other
chains built with the Polkadot SDK the ability to upgrade their runtime (a chain's "business logic")

> without hard forking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The usage of [WebAssembly](./learn-wasm.md) in the Polkadot SDK (the framework powering Polkadot,
Kusama and their respective parachains), give the relay chain, its parachains, as well as any other standalone solo
chains built with the Polkadot SDK the ability to upgrade their runtime (the chain's "business logic")
without a hard fork of the respective network.
```

Rather than encoding the runtime in the nodes,
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} nodes contain a WebAssembly
[execution host](learn-polkadot-host). They maintain consensus on a very low-level and
well-established instruction set. Upgrades can be small, isolated, and very specific by deploying
WebAssembly on-chain and having nodes auto-enact the new logic at a particular block height.

The {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} runtime is stored on the
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} blockchain itself.
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} can upgrade its runtime by upgrading
the logic stored on-chain and removes the coordination challenge of requiring thousands of node
operators to upgrade in advance of a given block number. Polkadot stakeholders propose and approve
upgrades through the [on-chain governance](./learn-polkadot-opengov.md) system, which also enacts

> them autonomously once voted through.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
them autonomously once the runtime upgrade referendum is approved through on-chain voting.
```

As a result of storing the runtime as part of the state, the runtime code itself becomes state
sensitive, and calls to runtime can change the runtime code itself. Therefore, the Polkadot Host
must always ensure it provides the runtime corresponding to the state in which the entry point has
been called.

### Forkless Upgrades - Parachains & Solo Chains

> The architecture for parachains and solo chains is the same as the relay chain, with the runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The node architectural design for parachains and solo chains is similar to that of the relay chain, with the runtime
```

> code being stored on-chain. Solo chains, which are blockchains which are not secured by / following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code being a Wasm blob that is stored in chain state. Solo chains built with Polkadot SDK, which are blockchains that have a native consensus mechanism that is independent of
```

the relay chain's consensus, are able to be update with whatever governance that solo chain has
implemented. This could either be a governance system like [OpenGov](./learn-polkadot-opengov.md),

> or a simple sudo/multisig setup.

Reviewer: "whatever governance" - consider using a more formal way of wording

```suggestion
the relay chain's consensus, can be updated through an on-chain governance system like [OpenGov](./learn-polkadot-opengov.md) or a simple sudo/multisig setup.
```

> Parachains must notify the relay chain whenever a new upgrade is to be enacted. This is done using

Reviewer: Could we add the extrinsic call names here?
